content/about.md, before:

---
title: About
weight: 100
pdf: false
epub: false
---


---


{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## Citation Information


### Chicago


### MLA


### Permanent URL


## Revision History


## Other Formats

  - [PDF (X MB)](/downloads/output.pdf)
  - [EPUB (X MB)](/downloads/output.epub)
  - [Kindle/MOBI (X MB)](/downloads/oputput.mobi)
  - [Paperback](#)

## Copyright

This publication was created using Quire™, a multiformat publishing tool from Getty.

© 2022 J. Paul Getty Trust

{{< q-class "cc-icon" >}}
<svg class="quire-copyright__icon">
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc"></use>
</switch>
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc-by"></use>
</switch>
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc-by-nc"></use>
  <foreignObject width="135" height="30">
      <img src="../img/icons/cc-by-nc.png" alt="CC BY-NC" />
  </foreignObject>
</switch>
</svg>
{{< /q-class >}}

Unless otherwise indicated, the text of this work and figs.1.4a-b, 7.11, 7.15, 7.19, 7.23, and 7.27 are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license, visit creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. All other images are reproduced with the permission of the rights holders acknowledged in captions and expressly excluded from the CC BY-NC license covering the rest of this publication. These images may not be reproduced, copied, transmitted, or manipulated without consent from the owners, who reserve all rights.

**Published by the Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
[getty.edu/publications](http://www.getty.edu/publications/)<br />

Laura diZerega, *Project Editor*
Karen Jacobson, *Manuscript Editor*
Greg Albers, *Digital Manager*
Molly McGeehan, *Production*
Jeffrey Cohen, *Cover Designer*
Leslie Rollins, *Image and Rights Acquisition*
Erin Cecele Dunigan and Dina Murokh, *Assistant Digital Editors*

{{< q-class "cip-data" >}}

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

- Names:
- Title:
- Description:
- Identifiers: LCCN (print) | LCCN (ebook) | ISBN
   9781606066874 (paperback) | ISBN 9781606067673 (ebook) | ISBN
- Subjects:
- Classification:
- LC record available at
- LC ebook record available at

{{< /q-class >}}

Front cover: Osiris Canopus, Roman, AD 117–138 (detail). Alabaster. H: 50.8 cm (20 in.); Diam: 27.9 cm (11 in.). The Hague, Royal Collections, 4-1690. Reproduced with permission (final credit line TK).

Commit message:

Add publication description
taken from Consonance

content/about.md, after:

---
title: About
weight: 100
pdf: false
epub: false
---

From Mycenaean weaponry found among the cargo of a Bronze Age shipwreck off the Turkish coast to the Egyptian-inspired domestic interiors of a luxury villa built in Greece during the Roman Empire, Egypt and the Classical World documents two millennia of cultural and artistic interconnectedness in the ancient Mediterranean. This open-access volume gathers pioneering research from the Getty scholars' symposium that helped shape the major international loan exhibition Beyond the Nile: Egypt and the Classical World (J. Paul Getty Museum, 2018).
Generously illustrated essays consider a range of artistic and other material evidence, including archaeological finds, artworks, and inscriptions, to shed light on cultural interactions between Egypt, Greece, and Rome from the Late Period and Ptolemaic dynasty to the Roman Empire. The military's role as a conduit of knowledge and ideas in the Bronze Age Aegean, and an in-depth study of hieroglyphic Egyptian inscriptions found on Roman obelisks offer but two examples of scholarly lacunae addressed by this publication. Specialists across the fields of art history, archaeology, Classics, Egyptology, and philology will benefit from the volume's investigations into syncretic processes that enlivened and informed nearly twenty-five hundred years of dynamic cultural exchange.

---


{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## Citation Information


### Chicago


### MLA


### Permanent URL


## Revision History


## Other Formats

  - [PDF (X MB)](/downloads/output.pdf)
  - [EPUB (X MB)](/downloads/output.epub)
  - [Kindle/MOBI (X MB)](/downloads/oputput.mobi)
  - [Paperback](#)

## Copyright

This publication was created using Quire™, a multiformat publishing tool from Getty.

© 2022 J. Paul Getty Trust

{{< q-class "cc-icon" >}}
<svg class="quire-copyright__icon">
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc"></use>
</switch>
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc-by"></use>
</switch>
<switch>
  <use xlink:href="#cc-by-nc"></use>
  <foreignObject width="135" height="30">
      <img src="../img/icons/cc-by-nc.png" alt="CC BY-NC" />
  </foreignObject>
</switch>
</svg>
{{< /q-class >}}

Unless otherwise indicated, the text of this work and figs.1.4a-b, 7.11, 7.15, 7.19, 7.23, and 7.27 are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license, visit creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. All other images are reproduced with the permission of the rights holders acknowledged in captions and expressly excluded from the CC BY-NC license covering the rest of this publication. These images may not be reproduced, copied, transmitted, or manipulated without consent from the owners, who reserve all rights.

**Published by the Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
[getty.edu/publications](http://www.getty.edu/publications/)<br />

Laura diZerega, *Project Editor*
Karen Jacobson, *Manuscript Editor*
Greg Albers, *Digital Manager*
Molly McGeehan, *Production*
Jeffrey Cohen, *Cover Designer*
Leslie Rollins, *Image and Rights Acquisition*
Erin Cecele Dunigan and Dina Murokh, *Assistant Digital Editors*

{{< q-class "cip-data" >}}

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

- Names:
- Title:
- Description:
- Identifiers: LCCN (print) | LCCN (ebook) | ISBN
   9781606066874 (paperback) | ISBN 9781606067673 (ebook) | ISBN
- Subjects:
- Classification:
- LC record available at
- LC ebook record available at

{{< /q-class >}}

Front cover: Osiris Canopus, Roman, AD 117–138 (detail). Alabaster. H: 50.8 cm (20 in.); Diam: 27.9 cm (11 in.). The Hague, Royal Collections, 4-1690. Reproduced with permission (final credit line TK).
